---
title: "Tailwind CSS: The Pragmatic Choice for Faster UI Development"
description: "Understanding the Benefits, Trade-offs, and Adoption of Tailwind CSS"
publishDate: "4 March 2024"
tags: ["css", "tailwind", "web development"]
coverImage:
  src: "./spread_operator.png"
  alt: "JS pread operator"
---

## <a id="intro-beyond-framework-wars" href="#introduction-beyond-the-framework-wars" class="markdown-heading">Introduction: Beyond the Framework Wars</a>

Another day, another Tailwind post and a new JS framework coming out. As a disclaimer, my aim for this article is not to endlessly praise Tailwind, nor is it to compare it with other CSS frameworks. The whole X vs Y CSS framework debate and discussion is still happening because developers love to defend their beloved tools and frameworks. But I digress. As a quick recap, Tailwind is a utility-first CSS framework that offers an alternative way to style UIs. It has arguably great developer experience, a mature ecosystem, wide adoption, and is compatible with a ton of web frameworks. I’ve been using Tailwind professionally for the past 4 years and it has been for the most part a nice and enjoyable experience. It has helped me build and ship UIs faster and has even helped debug visual bugs quicker (I think?). This article does not have a clear aim or objective. I will not attempt to persuade you to ditch your current styling solution for Tailwind and pretend it will fix all your problems. The truth is convincing developers can be monumental task and waste of effort. Technology moves incredibly fast. It is hard enough to keep up with tech news and new tools coming out. By the time this article is published, two new CSS frameworks are coming out. I instead want to point out what Tailwind gets right, who it is targeted for, and what gap it filled when it first came onto the scene.

## <a id="tailwind-landscape" href="#the-tailwind-landscape-lovers-skeptics-and-critics" class="markdown-heading">The Tailwind Landscape: Lovers, Skeptics, and Critics</a>

Some developers are using Tailwind and genuinely love it, others may be considering giving it a test drive to see what all the fuzz is about, and there are even those who will die on the “Tailwind is the devil, CSS is the salvation” hill. That’s fine. We all have our philosophies, beliefs, and preferences when it comes to tech tools and approaches. The one thing I do hope readers will take away from this article is understanding the benefits Tailwind provides for many, what problem it came to solve and why it has reached such massive community success and adoption rate. This is an undeniable fact. Loads of tech companies, early startups, solo devs are all building and shipping their UIs using Tailwind. And they are doing it fast.

## <a id="tailwind-stand-out" href="#what-makes-tailwind-stand-out" class="markdown-heading">What Makes Tailwind Stand Out</a>

Probably Tailwind’s biggest selling points are customizability, good built-in defaults, un-opinionated styles, speed of development, and documentation. It provides a standardized system of utility classes and design tokens, covering colors, typography, layouts, spacing, responsiveness, positioning, sizing, dark mode, and much more. You can customize the theme configuration or stick with the default, up to you. This is great. Before Tailwind came onto the scene, creating a custom design system meant either hand-rolling it with raw CSS or a preprocessor, or adopting a full-fledged UI component library like Material UI, Bootstrap, Chakra UI, etc. With most UI libraries, adopting one meant locking yourself into their predefined styles. Tailwind, however, took a different approach. It said, “Naming CSS classes, managing rules, and handling specificity conflicts is a hassle. Here are utility classes you can inline to cover most common use cases, so you don’t have to worry about styling overhead or remembering class names. We’ll also tree-shake unused styles in production to improve performance. Plus, you can easily build your own theme and design system using our primitives, or just use our default theme”. Tailwind became the missing answer for teams and companies who lacked deep CSS expertise but also did not want to pay the cost of getting married to a pre-styled UI component library (although TW does play nicely with things like Material UI) just to reap the benefits of a production ready CSS theme and design system. Tailwind came in and filled that gap which helped tons of developer teams build UIs faster. Its impact on the developer community and the industry as a whole is undeniable.

## <a id="tailwind-tradeoffs" href="#the-trade-offs-tailwind-vs-alternative-approaches" class="markdown-heading">The Trade-offs: Tailwind vs. Alternative Approaches</a>

Can you achieve the same with raw CSS, SCSS, or even another CSS framework? Absolutely. Have a ton of successful tech companies built UI products with just raw CSS and no other styling abstractions? Surely. But understand the tradeoff you are making. It takes significant time and effort to properly build a design system. I was unfortunate enough to work on a handful of projects that had their design system built on raw CSS and I still get war flashbacks from the over-engineered and just outright clunky ergonomics they offered. Developer experience was an afterthought. Frankly, I don’t blame the authors of those custom design systems and styling abstractions; frontend development is complex, and we’re juggling a lot of different responsibilities. Tailwind understands this and helps lighten the load. Its true value lies in its convention—a widely adopted, standardized approach that many teams and organizations have converged on. The developer experience, with inline comments on utility classes that clearly indicate which CSS is being applied, is seamless and intuitive. The Tailwind team understands developer pain points and works to minimize them.

## <a id="bigger-picture" href="#the-bigger-picture-developer-experience-and-team-productivity" class="markdown-heading">The Bigger Picture: Developer Experience and Team Productivity</a>

Other utility-first CSS frameworks exist, such as UnoCSS, AtomicCSS, and many more. I chose Tailwind for this article because it is widely known and needs no introduction. Remember, Tailwind’s value is in the system it provides, it offloads decisions on how to style UIs, which ultimately helps many small and resource constrained teams get up and running quickly and ship UIs faster. Once you’re familiar with it, working in Tailwind-based projects is seamless, eliminating the need to learn custom styling abstractions. That said, if you’re a CSS expert and have already built a scalable, standardized approach within your team, more power to you. Like everything in software development, what you choose to use depends on your own context, needs, and experience. Happy hacking!
